DA to write to GPL speaker about MEC Maile’s unruly behaviour in the House 3 March 2021 The Democratic Alliance (DA) in Gauteng will be writing to the Speaker of the Gauteng Provincial Legislature (GPL), Ntombi Mekgwe, to investigate MEC Lebogang Maile’s conduct and institute disciplinary measures, following the chaos that descended in the House yesterday. The MEC for Human Settlements and Cooperative Governance, resorted to name calling while answering questions put to the Executive. The Speaker made no attempt to ask MEC Maile to withdraw his comments that my colleague Councillor Leah Knott is a ‘domkop’ and allowed this name calling to continue unabated in the House. Further to this, several times Maile told members of the DA caucus to ‘shut up’ when they tried to address his inappropriate language. It appears as if this was just a way for the MEC to obfuscate and deflect from the fact that he is failing in his mandate as MEC responsible for the proper functioning of local government. MEC Maile is one to always call people derogatory names when he has nothing to offer or to run away from accountability. This is not how government leaders should behave. The unruly behaviour displayed by the MEC has compromised the decorum of the House and shows a blatant disregard for the opposition, whose responsibility it is to ensure that ANC-led government is held to account where service delivery is not functional in a proper and timely manner. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_3',114,'0','0']));Maile’s unchecked arrogance is a clear sign that he feels emboldened to take over from Makhura as premier. Makhura may find it difficult to survive the allegations against him, as his enemies from inside uses it in a concerted campaign to replace him with Maile. The DA will continue to hold the ANC-led government to account through the various structures put in place by the GPL and will not be deterred by the petulant utterances of MEC Maile. Issued by Solly Msimanga,Official Leader of the Opposition- Gauteng, 3 March 2021