The RET National Operations Committee, hosted by the Gauteng RET President Zuma Support Group, condemns the repression of students demanding free education, and pledges full support 11 March 2021 The Radical Economic Transformations (RET) National Operations Committee during our strategic planning meeting today discussed the serious challenges that students throughout the country are faced with regarding their legitimate demand for Free Quality Education. The Committee wishes to express our outrage with the statement by the Minister of Higher Education, Blade Nzimande, that "free education is a Zuma thing". It must be emphasised that free education is the ofÞcial policy of the African National Congress (ANC). Minister Nzimande must be reminded that the Freedom Charter states: "The Doors of Learning and Culture Shall be Opened". It is an outrage that our students have to face the brutality of the police in order to attain what is the ofÞcial policy of the ANC, and which they have been promised for decades! It must be emphasised that it does not matter that it was a bystander who was killed by the police. What matters is that a precious human life has been lost. We know that the bullet that killed him was meant for a student. We extend our heartfelt condolences to his family and loved ones. The unprovoked brutality of the police is an outrage that is very disturbing and reminiscent of the oppression that we knew under the apartheid police. We fully support the demand of our students for immediate free quality education. The RET National Operations Committee therefore resolved to join the protesting students today at the University of the Witwatersrand (WITS). We will face the brutality of the police together with the students, they are our sons and daughters! Our blood flows in their veins - we will never betray them! All who support Radical Economic Transformation (RET), as the official ANC economic policy programme, and who are able to join the student protesters tomorrow at WITS, are urged to join us. We are aware that it may be difficult to join us at short notice from far flung provinces and areas, and therefore a specific call is made for ANC RET supporters in Gauteng to make a special effort to join us tomorrow. Today, 11 March 2021, at 10:00 we will gather at the main entrance to the University of the Witwatersrand to join the protesting students in solidarity. FeesMustFall! Issued by Carl Niehaus on behalf of Gauteng RET President Zuma Support Group, 11 March 2021 eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-4','ezslot_3',115,'0','0']));