New leaders for the Cape Chamber of Commerce & Industry 4 March 2021 Jacques Moolman is the new president of the Chamber following his election to succeed Ms. Janine Myburgh at the chamber annual general meeting. Jacques is general manager of Southern Sun The Cullinan in Cape Town, appointed to run this premier destination in the Mother City after a stellar career in the hotel industry which took him rapidly up the managerial ladder, gathering numerous awards as he went. He has worked for Tsogo Sun Hotels since 2003, holding general manager positions in seven different Tsogo Sun Hotels in different provinces. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_3',113,'0','0']));He was previously vice-president and director on the Board of the Cape Chamber of Commerce and Industry, a Chamber Council member, chairman of the Cape Town Central Chapter and serves as a director on the Board of the Cape Castle Control Board. Jacques has a degree in Strategic Management, Diploma in Hospitality and Business Administration. In his spare time, he practices as a qualified business coach. The new deputy President of the Cape Chamber of Commerce and Industry is Derryn Brigg of Derryn Brigg Consulting. She is also the chairperson of the Chamber’s Constitution Review Committee. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_5',114,'0','0']));Derryn has an Honours degree in Industrial Psychology from Unisa attaining four course-distinctions. She is an accredited business advisor with various private and government small business agencies, a judge for the International Women’s Entrepreneurial Challenge, and is the author of a quartet of books titled The Seriously Light-hearted Guides -- to Planning Your Business! Basic Compliance for Small Businesses! BBBEE Benefits for Black Owned Small Businesses! And a Guide to Funding Your Start-up Business. For good measure, Derryn is also the administrative manager and co-owner of TS Rigging Solutions as well as a small eco-friendly cleaning products distribution company. Issued by Dean Le Grange,Media and Digital Co-ordinator, Cape Chamber of Commerce and Industry, 4 March 2021