Motion of no confidence in Premier Makhura demonstrates that the public has lost faith in the ANC (No-confidence debate in Gauteng Legislature) 2 March 2021 During the debate on the motion of no confidence in the Gauteng Premier, David Makhura, the FF Plus made it very clear that the party considers the motion one of no confidence in the ANC as government because the people of Gauteng have lost faith in the party. The fact that only four votes prevented the motion from being successful serves as proof of the ANC's waning popularity. In fact, the ANC retained the province with a single seat after the 2019 elections and in 2024, its support will probably drop below the 50% threshold. The FF Plus argued that what the ANC is busy with is madness, which is the real reason why voters in Gauteng have less and less faith in the party. The madness is evident in numerous incidents, like the Life Esidimeni scandal, the ongoing e-toll saga, the Overvaal High School violence, the ever-expanding vicious cycle of poverty due to poor policy decision making, the high crime rate, the lack of quality education, the deterioration of hospitals, local government imploding with the ANC at the steer of things, lack of environmental conservation in the Vaal River and elsewhere in Gauteng, Covid-19 related corruption and the centralisation of food aid during the lockdown. The FF Plus wants to reiterate the warning it expressed during the debate on the State of the Province Address (SOPA): the ANC must stop digging the hole in which it finds itself even deeper. However, it is clear that the ANC is stubbornly continuing to dig despite warnings and sound advice from various sources. After every big scandal, there are promises of an ANC turn-around strategy, but nothing ever comes of them due to inherent flaws in the strategies as well as poor execution. Therefore, it is a given that the ANC is a systemic problem in the Gauteng landscape. The ANC will ultimately pay the price as voters are quickly losing more and more faith in the ANC government. Issued by Anton Alberts, FF Plus national chairperson and MPL: Gauteng, 2 March 2021