EFF STATEMENT ON THE 40TH BIRTHDAY OF CIC JULIUS MALEMA Wednesday, 3 March 2021 The EFF joins the masses of our people in South Africa, the African continent and the diaspora in wishing the lion of the north, the son of the soil, CIC Julius Sello Malema a Revolutionary Happy Birthday. We pay special gratitude to his family, in particular the late Koko Sarah for their role in the upbringing of this gallant, brave and selfless leader of our people. Asa generation, we are most fortunate that the pioneer of our economic emancipation struggle has reached the age of 40. Historically, many revolutionary generational movement have been deprived their political pioneers through untimely deaths and assassinations. In our own country, the tradition of radical black politics which we identify with started with Anton Lembede who died before he was 40 and during his founding early leadership of the ANC YL; Robert Sobukwe who was imprisoned before he was 40 and broken through solitary confinement and house arrest to the end of his days; Steve Biko, who was brutally killed by the regime before he was 40. Patrice Lumumba was killed before he reached 40. Thomas Sankara was assassinated before the age of 40. Che Guevara was killed before the age of 40. The global capitalist establishment did everything in their power to deprive the generations led by these revolutionaries an opportunity to experience quality and decisive leadership. We as the generation of Economic Freedom Fighters are blessed to be led by Comrade President Julius Sello Malema. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_4',113,'0','0']));The age of 40 is therefore the beginning of yet another chapter in his personal life and that of our movement. He has come this far and we celebrate in eternal joy that we shall continue to benefit from the gift of his capable leadership for many more years. The struggle for the emancipation of all African people will continue to benefit from the guidance of the Commander in Chief.  The name of Julius Malema, against his wishes of all enemies of black emancipation, has already been engraved amongst the gallant heroes and heroines of the African liberation struggle; the names of Thomas Sankara, Amilca Cabral, Patrice Lumumba, Kwame Nkruma and Winnie Mandela. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_6',114,'0','0']));He has lived all his life for the humanity, dignity and economic liberation of black people. His leadership has ensured the revival and continuation of the radical black liberation tradition that must see to it that Africa belongs to Africans. Despite all the tribulations, temptations and threats to his life and that of his loved ones, the CIC has never compromised that on the economic emancipation agenda. On the occasion of his birthday, we call on all ground forces to recommit ourselves to the attainment of economic freedom in our lifetime with the land at the centre. The greatest honour and gift we can give to the CIC is to always be united as a movement, serve our people selflessly and never betray their liberation aspirations. Hasta La Victoria Siempre Commandate Julius Malema. Revolutionary Happy Birthday! Issued by the EFF, 3 March 2021eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-4','ezslot_0',115,'0','0']));