Senseless murders of farmers and police officers 1 March 2021 Shortly after Bheki Cele, minister of police, announced the crime statistics for the third quarter of the 2020/21 financial year, more police officers were murdered. “Agri SA strongly condemns all murders of South Africans but especially the murder of farmers and police officers who must ensure that citizens have enough food to eat and can live in safety,” says Uys van der Westhuijzen, chairman of the organisation’scentre of excellence for rural safety. The statistics indicate, among others, an increase in farm murders in the third quarter from 6 in 2019/’20 to 19 in 2020/’21, which represents an increase of 13. According to the latest statistics, five police officers were murdered in the third quarter. “Both farmers and police officers are of strategic importance for the country, where farmers are responsible for food security and the police for maintaining law and order, urges Van der Westhuijzen. “For this reason, the murders of farmers and police officers are unacceptable and infringe upon the quality of life of members of these sectors.” Agri SA is aware of the impact that murder has on families and communities and wishes to extend its condolences to the next of kin. Two police officers were recently murdered in the Western Cape and according to reports, the murders occurred while they were on duty. The officers were ambushed and shot, after which their official firearms were stolen. These murders, which took place early on Saturday morning, followed after four police officers were murdered in KwaZulu-Natal. This brings the total number of police officers murdered to six in only ten days. “South Africa cannot tolerate these brutal murders of its farmers and police officers,” says Van der Westhuijzen. “Farmers and police officers are of strategic importance for the country and for maintaining national stability. We call on communities to share crime-related information with the police to enable them to take preventative action. Issued by Uys van der Westhuijzen, Chair of Agri SA’s Centre of Excellence: Rural Safety, 1 March 2021