Police Committee demands halt in legal dispute between SAPS and FDA 11 March 2021 The Portfolio Committee on Police has resolved that the South African Police Service (Saps) and the State Information Technology Agency (Sita) must halt their legal dispute with Forensic Data Analysts (FDA) to enable the operation of the Saps PCEM (Property Control and Exhibit Management) information system. The committee held a follow-up meeting with Saps and National Treasury about the increasing DNA case exhibit backlog, which is now over 172 000. The committee also received a briefing on a turnaround strategy within the Forensic Services Division of Saps. “It is our considered view that the turnaround strategy doesn’t deal decisively with the challenges faced by the division, mainly the issue of contract management, especially in relation to information technology. As a result, we have recommended that Saps implement an agreement they have with FDA in order to enable the functioning of the PCEM system. This resolution was mainly premised on the need to ensure functionality of the National Forensic Science Laboratory (NFSL) and ensure effective prosecution of gender-based violence suspects,” said Ms Tina Joemat-Pettersson, the Chairperson of the committee. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_1',113,'0','0']));The committee remains concerned that despite an injection of a further R350 million into the operational budget of forensic services, there is no sign of improvement. “While we welcome the increase in budget, the causal factors of the crisis persist, as supply chain management remains a serious concern. This has led to a lack of chemicals to undertake analysis at laboratories for the past two months,” said MsJoemat-Pettersson. As a result, the committee has also resolved that an investigation must be instituted to understand how the ICT impasse has taken so long to resolve. Failure to institute such an investigation will result in the committee writing to the Speaker of Parliament to seek alternatives to instituting the necessary investigation. Secondly, the committee has resolved that the Saps and Sita has to present a plan of action with timelines to the committee by next week Wednesday. This resolution is to ensure that workable solutions are found urgently to reverse the unacceptable situation. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_3',114,'0','0']));Lastly, the committee will receive a detailed report from Saps, Sita and National Treasury on their enagegements with the FDA, with suggested solutions. Ultimately, what the committee is interested in is ensuring a criminal justice system that serves the people of this country. Issued by Malatswa Molepo, Media Officer, Parliamentary Communication Services, 11 March 2021 