Premier Mokgoro should come clean on allegations of rogue unit 5 March 2021 Note to Editors: Find attached soundbite in English by DA North West Spokesperson on Office of the Premier, Freddy Sonakile. The Democratic Alliance (DA) in North West is concerned about the latest reports of a rogue unit, that was allegedly appointed by Premier Job Mokgoro, to spy on executive committee members (MECs) and senior politicians in the province. The DA has been reliably informed that two MEC's in the province confirmed the existence of such a unit in sworn affidavits. They claim to have been approached by the unit, who instructed them to appoint certain individuals to management positions in their respective Departments. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_1',113,'0','0']));Due to the seriousness of these allegations, the DA will be writing to the Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on the Office of the Premier in the Legislature, Aaron Motswana, to summon Premier Job Mokgoro and all other individuals who are suspected to have knowledge of this rogue unit’s operations, to take us into confidence. It is not the first time that allegations of a rogue unit surfaces in this province. It is alleged that in 2015, a rogue unit ensured that the termination of an irregular security contract with the Legislature be withdrawn. The then Secretary of the Legislature, Mamokwena Gaoretelelwe was instructed by the Speaker, Sussana Dantjie, to withdraw the termination at a loss of state funds. (See letter attached.) eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_3',114,'0','0']));As the only entity that can legally investigate such allegations, we will submit a complaint to the office of the Inspector General of intelligence (IGI) to investigate these allegations, dating back to 2015 and all politicians who were involved. This is a serious matter and threatens the security of all of Government. The DA will not tolerate leadership that is akin to tyranny and intimidation and will continue to expose strong-arm tactics by the ANC. Issued by Freddy Sonakile, DA North West Spokesperson on Premier's Office, 5 March 2021