OSA to participate in 2021 Local Government Elections with independent candidates 25 January 2021 The One South Africa Movement’s National Council—it’s highest decision-making body—sat this weekend to review the movement's first year in operation, and to decide on its plan of action for 2021. National Council is comprised of GSA's directors, provincial coordinators and representatives from affiliate bodies and organisations and is empowered by our constitution to take decisions on the direction and strategy of the movement. On top of National Council's agenda was to decide how the movement will approach the upcoming Local Government Elections (LGE) to be held later this year and what role it will play. When we began OSA one year ago in January 2020, we committed to play our part in building One South Africa that is fair, reconciled and prosperous for all. A critical element of achieving this is to reimagine the way we identify, elect and ultimately hold to account those in government. We are convinced that to change our country we desperately and urgently require a change in both governance and government. To this end, we must provide the people of South Africa something new and something different, guided by the principle of giving true power back to the people. OSA is not a political party and will not become a political party. We believe the party-political system is fundamentally broken and adding another party to the ever-growing list is not a viable solution. However, we cannot simply sit back and spectate while our country heads in the wrong direction. What is patently clear is that local government is failing and our citizens are suffering as a result. Therefore, National Council has resolved to support a cohort of independent candidates, chosen by their communities to stand for election as ward councillors in the Local Government Elections. We are convinced that these elections can and will demonstrate the power and potential of independent candidates, providing South Africans with a real alternative to political parties. OSA will not be on the ballot paper. Rather, we will support, train, equip and campaign for OSA endorsed independents in wards across the country. By working with communities and affiliates, we aim to bring change to councils and municipalities across the country. These candidates will not be OSA candidates — they will be independent candidates of their community — supported by the people, focused on delivering for the people. Instead of candidates being imposed onto communities, this allows communities to choose the best of the best to represent them in councils. All OSA endorsed candidates will be required to sign our pact (attached to this statement). OSA will support these candidates by equipping them with an enabling infrastructure, training and access to tools that will help them win their respective elections. We will not be in a position to provide blanket support to independents across the country. We therefore need to commence a process to identify the independent candidates and communities which we will support. Therefore, in the coming days we will open a process inviting all South Africans to submit independent candidates and wards they believe OSA should support in the upcoming elections. Those applying ought to espouse ethical leadership and be held in high esteem by members of their community. Each submission will need to answer the following questions: What ward and what municipality will be contested? What is the name and surname of the proposed independent candidate? Why would this candidate be the best person to represent the ward as its councillor? What is the independent candidate's campaign plan? What are the organisations or community groupings present in the ward that OSA could partner with in support of the independent candidate? In addition to the answers to the above questions, each submission must be accompanied by a list of signatures of ward residents pledging support for the independent's candidacy. All submissions must be sent via e-mail to wards@osa.org.za by no later than 5pm on Monday 1 March 2021. In terms of training, National Council emphasised the importance of capacity building by equipping individuals to become statesmen and stateswomen. Once selected, candidates will be trained in our School of Governance on how to be effective and accountable councillors who add serve their communities and add real value. This is part of OSA's core offer to candidates. Therefore, National Council approved the following: The establishment of an OSA academy, a training platform in partnership with AfricaX and AtVance. The programmes offered include leadership, local governance training, entrepreneurship and finance. To work with the School of Governance and candidate training programmes in partnership with the Leadership Institute in Washington DC. The first training programmes will commence on 29 March 2021. The first cohort of candidates will also be trained by the Chandler Institute of training in Singapore. This will commence in the month of March. National Council also resolved to establish two distinct bodies. Firstly, a Governance and Oversight Forum to recruit, train and provide oversight of councillors work post elections. And secondly, a Campaign Committee to ensure that support is adequately provided to candidates throughout their election campaigns. The time for real change in South Africa is now. And the power lies in the hands of the people, not with political parties. We are confident that this year's elections will be a watershed moment in history and we therefore are against any inclination to postpone the elections. The truth is the future of South Africa won't be shaped by any political party. Instead, we are building an alternative, a fresh start for South Africa. A grassroots movement comprising ofall South Africans who share common goals of building a non-racial society, a quality education system that empowers citizens and a resilient economy that includes every South African. We are laying the foundation for South Africa's second transition as citizens to hand power back to the people. We urge communities to use their power to get behind leaders in their communities whom can truly represent them instead of being imposed upon them by political parties. We call on all South Africans to join us and make your submissions for independent candidates. It's time to take power back to the people and give them a true voice in government. Our Pact We believe in a just society in which all citizens can live together peacefully and prosper. We do so by being activists where we campaign on behalf of all citizens and hold government and civic society accountable for their actions. The One South Africa Movement is working to build a society where: There can be racial, cultural and gender harmony and tolerance amongst all citizens. Citizens can fairly and equitably participate in our economy and prosper. Our students, young and old, can have access to a world-class education that empowers them for a future of their choice and capability. Our citizens can be able to live free from crime and corruption. We can address the historical injustices of South Africa and any future injustices perpetrated. Build a government that is capable, agile, transparent and future-focused. Public representatives will be chosen directly by the people and are accountable to the people. We can live in a sustainable environment that we can hand over to future generations. There is complete human dignity for all that can never be taken away. This is our pledge and if we work together locally and across the continent of Africa, we can build a future for generations to uphold. Issued by Mmusi Maimane, 25 January 2021