SAMWU mourns the passing of its General Secretary, Koena Wilson Ramotlou January 2, 2021 It is with great sadness and shock that we announce the passing away of SAMWU General Secretary, Comrade Koena Ramotlou. Born on 29 May 1978, Ramotlou passed away in hospital earlier today following his hospitalization on the 6th December 2020.eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_0',112,'0','0'])); Koena Ramotlou was recently elected General Secretary at the union’s 12th National Congress held in December 2020. He also previously served as the union’s Deputy General Secretary after having have been elected to that position in 2015 at the union’s 11th National Congress. Comrade Koena, affectionately known as “Kolobe” spent his entire working life in the Local Government sector. After graduating from the Johannesburg Technical College, Comrade Koena begun his Local Government by taking up internship at the City of Ekurhuleni. He was subsequently employed on a fulltime basis by the municipality and joined SAMWU, leading to his election as Branch Secretary and ultimately Gauteng Provincial Chairperson. Comrade Koena later took up employment at the union’s head offices and served in various roles, including; National Educator, International Relations Officer and Head of Department: Organizing and Development. The National Office Bearers of SAMWU take this opportunity to, on behalf of the country’s municipal workers extend sincere and heartfelt condolences to the Ramotlou family, his wife Mokgadi and his children. Comrade Koena will be remembered for the love that he had for the country’s municipal workers, the working class and his family. The family’s loss is a loss to the entire union membership and the country’s municipal workers. We have been robbed of a dedicated servant of the union who was rooted firmly in the trade union movement and the Mass Democratic Movement structures.eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_1',114,'0','0'])); Comrade Koena was a principled Cadre of the movement who dedicated his live to ensuring that the working conditions of municipal workers are improved for the better. He was a hard worker who fulfilled his duties and obligations to municipal workers without fail, he was always available and true to the call of advancing the gains that have been made in the sectors that the union organizes in. We once more send our sincere and heartfelt condolences and sympathies to the Ramotlou family during this difficult time. We further thank the family for having have released him to serve the country’s municipal workers, being away from home for extended periods. The union’s NOBs will be visiting the family to personally convey condolences on behalf of the union’s membership and workers.eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-4','ezslot_3',115,'0','0'])); May his soul rest in peace! Robala gabotse Kolobe! Statement issued by Dumisane Magagula, SAMWU Deputy General Secretary, 2 January 2021 