EFF calls for the dismissal of Minister Thoko Didiza due to incompetence and lack of accountability 25 January 2021 The EFF is outraged and deeply concerned by the persistent incompetence demonstrated by Minister of Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development, Thoko Didiza in relation to her statutory and routine responsibilities. This relates to the failure to submit annual reports which most serve as basis of accountability to parliament. The Ministry and Department's mandatory Annual Reporting deadline was initially the 30th September 2020. Yet, to this day, the Minister and her department have not submitted the Annual Performance Report for 2020. Parliament agreed to give her an unsolicited extension for submission of the report to the 30th October 2020. Upon arrival and long passing of this deadline, the Minister has now requested a further extension to the 3151 January 2021. We consider the Minister's failure to honour the statutory obligations as a serious matter that her empty promises betray. It is a well-known fact that financial reporting is a monthly fiduciary duty that Minister Didiza most see to it that it happens without fail. The said reporting covers even matters relating conditional grants. Therefore, it is inexcusable that matters pertaining to accountability in respect of the conditional grants or any matter bearing financial implications cannot be resolved until the end of the reporting period. The fact that it had to take the Auditor General to pick up the irregularities in respect of the grant in question goes to demonstrate the Minister's extent of delinquency and incompetence that requires swift action by the President. It also shows the extent of her failure to exercise political oversight as the executive authority over the activities and affairs of the department to such an extent that a routine matter degenerate into a crisis. In our view the Minister has not taken parliament and the public into confidence about what are the concrete reasons for her failure to perform routine duties, let alone strategic responsibilities. This is because there are no reasonable or sound excuses. Lockdown and the AG's report are in adequate reasons and must be dismissed with contempt. We further reject the Minister's request for an extension and call on her immediate removal from office. Failure of accountability to parliament must constitute dismissal as it is central to any assessment of competence and seriousness. Issued by Vuyani Pambo, National Spokesperson, EFF, 25 January 2021