EFF statement on funding of apartheid murderer Eugene de Kock by the ANC announcement 29 January 2021 The EFF is appalled but not shocked by the revelations at the State Capture Commission, that the State Security Agency (SSA) has, over the past five-years funded the lifestyle of Vlakplaas murderer and Apartheid assassin Eugene De Kock. In a testimony that exposed the complicity of the ruling party in using tax payer money to reward a criminal who tortured and killed freedom fighters. A witness identified as Mr Y told of how Eugene De Kock has amassed benefits from the state amounting to R200 000 a month, to sustain his blood-stained livelihood. An unidentified witness testified that the State Security Agency in an operation known as "Operation Lock", De Kock received a monthly salary of R40 000 since his inexplicable release on parole in 2015, which can only be regarded as a reward for services rendered. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_1',113,'0','0']));There is no moral or political justification for placing an individual who led the burning, torture and murder of black anti-Apartheid activists in one of the most infamous sites of injustice known as Vlakplaas, on the payroll of the state. The money received by De Kock at the behest of the ruling party and so-called former liberation movement is a confirmation that the organization identifies itself with the regime of terror and continues to reward its Apartheid darlings at the expense of the lives and memory of African people. It is the so-called former liberation movement that spits on the graves of the families of the slain in Boipatong, by honoring Apartheid President F.W De Klerk, giving him Presidential benefits and inviting him to a democratic parliament. It is this compromised ruling party, that year after year traumatizes the Hani family, by considering parole for the murder of Chris Hani and the release of his assassin Janusz Walus. The ANC's commitment to self-hate and anti-blackness is further confirmed in the welfare it provides to one of Apartheid's most brutal servants eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_3',114,'0','0']));The EFF condemns the funding of the lifestyle of a perpetrator of crimes against humanity and calls for a comprehensive report by the State Security Agency on the money that has been paid to De Kock and many others for the clandestine activities he clearly performed in collaboration with the ruling party. The continued remuneration of De Kock by the South African state amounts to a pensioner package for being a servant of Apartheid and must never be tolerated. All transactions must be made available for public scrutiny and reimbursed by all those who authorized them. Issued by Vuyani Pambo, National Spokesperson, EFF, 29 January 2021