February school reopening not in the best interest of learners, health experts must brief Basic Education Committee  15 January 2021 The Democratic Alliance (DA) does not support the announcement by the Minister of Basic Education, Angie Motshekga, that the reopening of schools has been pushed back by two weeks to mid-February 2021, and which has left more questions than answers, including when regulations regarding the reopening would be published. We strongly believe that the health and safety of learners and teachers should be prioritized, however, we do not believe delaying the start of the academic year will achieve this. Instead of halting schooling for two weeks, the Department of Basic Education (DBE), in conjunction with school districts should have used the time during the school holiday wisely and worked meticulously to equip schools with proper Covid-resources to keep learners and teachers safe. The DA is concerned about the impact that this delay could have on the psychological and academic development of learners. The year was already set to start quite late and a further delay could cost learners dearly, with no plan to recover the lost time in learning. The DA therefore again calls on the Portfolio Committee on Basic Education to be briefed by relevant health experts, the Ministerial Advisory Committee (MAC) and the Departments of Basic Education and Health to ensure that the delay of the reopening of schools was indeed based on empirical proof and not political whim. Further guidance should also be given on the best way to safely reopen schools for both teachers and learners. Many learners are still coming to terms with the disruptions to the previous academic year, and to suffer through another chaotic school year could have devastating long-term effects on the learners. Particularly those in poorer, less-resourced communities, where children also depend on the National School Nutrition Programme (NSNP) to provide them with regular, healthy meals. This delay could also have consequences on school administrators who now have to go through the extra strain of finishing the curriculum in a now shortened school year. The DA believes that a differentiated approach led by the provinces should be employed in this regard as they are not equally affected by the spread of Covid-19, with secondary waves of infection set to hit different parts of the country throughout the year until enough people are vaccinated to provide herd-immunity. A nation-wide shutdown of schools when certain areas are more highly affected would be highly illogical and damaging to learners. Instead, provincial departments of education and health should work together to determine when and if schools in the various provinces should close for a period of time. The DBE should also communicate clear regulations as a matter of urgency to ensure that schools have enough time to comply. These regulations should stipulate the exact conditions under which schools could safely reopen, such as: The proper implementation of social distancing protocols at schools. Access to safe PPE, clean water and proper sanitation. An emergency health plan at all schools in response to positive cases. Clear plans to continue schooling for those teachers or learners who suffer from comorbidities. The DA is of the view that schools that do not adhere to the above-mentioned regulations, cannot reopen until such time that they are compliant. No mention has been made on the impact the delayed reopening of schools would have on parents who have structured their holidays to take care of their children, but now might struggle to find someone to look after them they return to work. The DA would also encourage the DBE to urgently engage with the Department of Social Development regarding the reopening of Early Childhood Development (ECD) centres which are vital to communities in terms of child safety, child development and nutrition. Finally, the DBE should work closely with the Department of Health to prioritise plans around the vaccination of teachers. The delay in the reopening of schools is unfortunate and will hamper learners’ education careers rather than help them, and therefore an immediate plan to extend the school day must be considered. Issued by Bax Nodada, DA Shadow Minister of Basic Education, 15 January 2021 