EFF STATEMENT ON SYDNEY MUFAMADI'S TESTIMONY AT THE STATE CAPTURE COMMISSION OF INQUIRY Monday, 25 January 2021 The EFF notes the evidence and testimony led by Sydney Mufamadi at the State Capture Commission of Inquiry. In this evidence, Mufamadi exposes how State Security Agency funds were used for the personal enrichment of Jacob Zuma, as well as for the settling of internal ANC factional battles. Most worrying is evidence relating to the infiltration of the Judiciary to manipulate favourable outcomes. Mufamadi indicates that through Project Justice, there was recruitment and handling of sources within the judiciary to influence outcomes in cases against Zuma. We call on the immediate revelation of all those sources within the judiciary who were on the payroll or who handled this or any other SSA project. Surely, Justice Zondo understands the importance of an urgent revelation of these names so that they are all immediately suspended and taken through a due disciplinary and criminal process. Our judiciary must be independent. Moreover, our justice must never be for sale and available to the highest bidder. We also call on the immediate criminal prosecution of those who presided over Project Justice, including Deputy Minister David Mahlobo. This is a clear and classic case of the defeat of the ends of justice, and as such, all abovementioned individuals must be prosecuted and face the full might of the law. An independent judiciary is the cornerstone of a democratic society, as the rule of law depends on a credible and publicly legitimate court system. Moreover, South Africans ought to be assured that our judges cannot be bought, particularly by state institutions. The buying of judges by the SSA is a violation of the constitution and the principle of separation of powers. As such, all who were bought or handled by the SSA within the judiciary ought to be named and shamed! The EFF will further open a criminal case against Deputy Minister David Mahlobo for his role in the execution of these criminal projects. In particular, for the infiltration of the judiciary, and the admission to channelling SSA funds in a form of a monthly payment of up to R4 million to Jacob Zuma. Issued by the EFF, 25 January 2021