EFF STATEMENT ON CLOSURE OF SCHOOLS DUE TO COVID-19 Friday, 15 January 2021 The EFF has noted the decision by the Department of Basic Education, which has announced this morning that schools will remain closed and will only be reopened on the 15 February 2021. This is a logical decision in the face of the viscous spread of the Coronavirus which has claimed the lives of more than 35 000 people in South Africa and continues to overwhelm our fragile healthcare system. It is particularly a wise decision, as the new variant of Covid-19, has been identified to be prevalent even amongst young people without any underlying conditions, meaning that reopening of schools would have amounted to the sacrificing of the future of our nation to the deadly virus. However, we are disgusted by the fact that private schools will be 'persuaded' to close which effectively means that private schools have the discretion to remain open whilst the government schools are closed. This cowardice decision to open private schools is the highest form of self-hate and separate development from a government that is always quick to tell black people what to do and lives in fear of white people. It is no secret that private schools are attended by children of white people, ministers and politicians so this decision does not affect those who took it. We will not sit back and watch this anti-black government close black people's schools whilst the children of the whites, the politicians and the affluent continue as if they are superior and God ordained. The impact of this will be that those who are in private s schools will have a competitive edge over their peers, over and above the one which already exists at the level of infrastructure development. This government must wake up from the slumber of self-hate and the inferiority complex which overwhelms them, and be conscious of the fact that they govern on behalf of all of us including white citizens. All schools must be closed immediately. If this is not done the EFF will ensure that all schools are closed. We are not going to be harassed and embarrassed by a snobbish government that thinks white people and the rich are better than blacks and can exist outside of the standards set for the rest of society. Statement issued by the EFF, 15 January 2021