MKMVA MOURNS THE PASSING ON COMRADE VICTOR TSIE, THE PROVINCIAL SECRETARY OF MKMVA IN THE NORTH WEST PROVINCE Sunday, 3 January 2021 The Umkhonto we Sizwe Military Veterans Association (MKMVA) is devastated by the passing on of comrade Victor Tsie. Comrade Victor belonged to a young generation of fearless freedom fighters. After a short period in exile comrade Victor (nom de guerre, Joey Mokwena), returned to South Africa and distinguished himself as a leader of the Self Defense Units that courageously defended our people at the height of the terrible violence that was meted out by the apartheid regime. Comrade Victor’s personal struggle life history speaks to us about how wrong it is, to try to define Self Defense Units outside the ranks of MK. His election as North West Provincial Secretary was in recognition of his personal dedication to our liberation struggle, and in recognition of the critical role of Self Defense Units in the ranks of MK. Comrade Victor distinguished himself as a dedicated leader of MKMVA whose passion was to improve the livelihoods and welfare of military veterans. MKMVA will sorely miss his insightful and passionate contributions to our MKMVA National Executive Committee (NEC) meetings, and the outstanding leadership that comrade Victor provided to MKMVA in the North West. His principled commitment fight against inequality and poverty, and dedication to attain Radical Economic Transformation (RET), as the official economic policy program of the ANC, will continue to inspire us. The reality that comrade Victor passed on because of a COVID-19 related illness, is very painful to his comrades. COVID-19 and other illnesses, sometimes related and sometimes not, have in the past year, and as we transition into the New Year, inflicted very serious and painful losses among the ranks of MK veterans. This is partially due to MK veterans falling in the older category of those who are more prone to serious health consequences when infected by COVID-19. However, we must acknowledge that the financial deprivation, poor housing and lack of proper health care, that many MK veterans suffer also play a significant role in the terrible losses that we have suffered. Overall this is part of how COVID-19 further exposed the terrible inequalities and lack of full economic liberation that most black (especially African) South Africans continue to suffer under in our country. MKMVA is aware of many MK veterans, and also ANC members in general, who are desperately ill with COVID-19. We are aware that as we issue this statement there are fellow comrades who literally fight for their lives. Our thoughts and prayers go out to them. They need urgent and adequate medical care, if it is not provided we will suffer many more devastating losses. It is deeply painful that the COVID-19 pandemic continues to rob our country of some of the most committed sons and daughters of our soil. MKMVA calls on all our members, the members of the ANC, and every South African to remain extra-vigilant especially in the light of the second wave. We implore everyone to adhere to all the COVID-19 regulations, to wear masks in public without fail, to wash our hands and sanitize, and maintain physical distancing, and regulary check symptoms and test. MKMVA conveys our heartfelt condolences to comrade Victor’s family, comrades and friends. The spear that comrade Victor so courageously, and with unflinching courage carried dropped, but we as his fellow MKMVA cadres will pick it up, and without hesitation continue the struggle for the full liberation of all our people. The details of comrade Victor’s funeral will in due course be announced by MKMVA. Hamba Kahle Mkhonto! Issued by Carl Niehaus, member of MKMVA National Executive Committee (NEC), and National Spokesperson, 3 January 2021 