EFF statement on land claims court ruling that farm dwellers may be forced to reduce live stock 29 January 2021 The EFF notes with shock and disappointment a recent Land Claims Court ruling that sets a dangerous precedent that compels farm dwellers to reduce their livestock number to cut down overgrazing. This bizarre ruling the court has made in terms of the Conservation of Agricultural resources Act No 43 of 1983, is another pre-1994 apartheid law designed to exclusively preserve all useful and arable land for the enjoyment of white farmers. In granting the order, Judge Spilg said "in favour of the farmer [and] granted an order for the removal of the occupier's [livestock] in order to give effect to the directives in the [Veld Condition Assessment] Report. The judge further stated during the hearing [...] that we have a duty to protect agricultural land, and that courts also have a duty to protect agricultural land". This is an unprecedented judgement and has far-reaching consequences on the living and working conditions of farm dwellers especially white owned farms. This judgement has left wide opened, floodgates for farm owners to successfully evict farm workers and dwellers under the pretext that they are refusing to reduce their overstocked livestock on white owned land. The matter in question raises multiple questions regarding the speed at which government is moving to accelerate the land reform programme and agrarian revolution. We call on Minister Thoko Didiza to move quickly and challenge this court ruling. Secondly, to negotiate an out of court settlement with the farmer in question not to compel the livestock owners squatting on land pending the department securing an alternative land whether on a lease or purchase basis. The EFF through its regional and local structures, particularly in the Mpumalanga province where this case occurred, will keenly monitor the situation and ensure that the farm dweller in question, keeps his livestock intact and receives our support. Issued by Vuyani Pambo, National Spokesperson, EFF, 29 January 2021