EFF STATEMENT ON MINISTER OF SMALL BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT KHUMBUDZO NTSHAVHENI'S FAILURE TO USE 92% OF COVID-19 RELIEF FUNDS Friday, 15 January 2021 eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_0',112,'0','0']));The EFF is appalled by the Department of Small Business led by Minister Ntshavheni, and its failure to allocate 92% of the funds that were designated as COVID-19 relief funds to aid small-businesses. As the EFF, we view this as a serious transgression and a deliberate act that undermines the people of this country, whose livelihoods are being ravaged by the deadly Coronavirus. This is a criminal offence and consequently, the Minister must be hauled in front of the portfolio committee in parliament in order to explain her criminal conduct in view of the following; The plight of the small businesses is so dire and consequently no effort must be spared in ensuring that they receive the necessary support from the department through funding. For a department with a budget at its disposal to only disburse 8% of relief funds in such desperate circumstances, reveals incompetence and irresponsibility from this government. Government had initially budgeted R1.4 billion for qualifying SMME's who are affected by the pandemic - and what do they get - nothing but a slap in the face by the department led by an incompetent Minister who is a surplus to requirement and does not deserve to occupy that crucial portfolio that is at the forefront of ensuring that small businesses thrive. Many livelihoods depend on small business enterprises for their survival even more so during these desperate times of this pandemic which is bringing untold suffering to the people of this country - the majority of them being our poor black people who depend on such funding for survival. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_1',114,'0','0']));In doing so, the department, under the leadership of this incompetent Minister Ntshavheni has violated one of the basic principles of Batho Pele - that of putting people first - a transgression that she can never be allowed to get away with. As EFF, we have always lamented underperforming ministers and government functionaries such as minister Ntshavheni, who have total disregard for the plight of our people when it comes to service delivery, as such she must be summarily removed. This issue in point therefore can never be allowed to be shelved like many - there must be serious consequences and action taken against this incompetent Minister and her management - heads must roll otherwise our people, especially because the SMME's will continue to suffer. Minister Ntshavheni in particular is one of the most arrogant ministers, who is known for her refusal to listen to the portfolio committee which oversees her Department and is tasked with practicing oversight. Finally, we demand that the minister and her department appear before the portfolio committee to explain their criminal conduct and how this serious abdication of their duties and responsibilities would be redressed, how the SMME's are going to receive relief funding and how soon. We call on the President of the Republic to remove this incompetent and arrogant minister with immediate effect and must never make the mistake of shifting her to another portfolio because she is not fit to lead any department with her sickening attitude, arrogance and incompetence. As the EFF, we will make sure that the minister and her Department are held to account. Statement issued by the EFF, 15 January 2021 