NEHAWU Limpopo condemns the constant attack on nurses by the Limpopo Department of Health  25 January 2021 eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_0',112,'0','0'])); The National Education, Health and Allied Workers’ Union (NEHAWU) in Limpopo is angered by the persistent and targeted attacks on nurses in the province by the Provincial Department of Health. The department has been on a warpath against nurses including using the media to launch attacks on our nurses who are currently waging a war against the COVID-19 pandemic. In this regard, we reject the lies spread by the MEC of Health, PhophiRamathuba, that nurses who lost their lives to the coronavirus were on leave and that there is no nurse that has lost their lives while on duty. This is the most insensitive and most provocative statement ever uttered by any politician since the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic. These utterances also perpetuates a misguided and dangerous view that nurses are irresponsible and are carriers of the virus into healthcare facilities. Furthermore, her utterances have a potential to stigmatizing these workers in society as well as in healthcare facilities amongst other workers. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_1',113,'0','0']));Nurses are working very hard on a daily basis looking after patients that are infected with this deadly virus and also at a primary healthcare level where they are also involved in testing and screening patients in clinics and healthcare centers. Majority of healthcare facilities are overflowing because of the effects of the pandemic and nurses are at the center of dealing with this influx, at times with limited resources. When the vaccination programme kicks off, the very same nurses will be expected to be at the center of running the anticipated mass vaccination programme amidst shortage of nurses throughout the province and across the country. These attacks also come at a time when the department is forcing circular 43 down the throats of healthcare workers in the province. They are unilaterally changing conditions of employment without consulting trade unions as representatives of workers. The duty rosters of nurses are being changed through intimidation in healthcare facilities and anyone who dare refuse these changes are threatened with disciplinary action. We, therefore, condemn the utterances of the MEC of health with the contempt it deserves. The attack on nurses proves that the department does not value their contribution and that they are only seen as soft targets to be harassed day in and day out. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_3',114,'0','0']));We are currently seeking an urgent meeting with the MEC to deal with this matter. Furthermore, NEHAWU working with other unions in the sector have received a certificate of non-resolution on circular 43 and will be giving the employer a notice to strike if this matter of circular 43 is not resolved as a matter of urgency. Issued by Jacob Adams on behalf of NEHAWU Secretariat Office, 25 January 2021