KZN SOPA: Premier must speak to the real needs of KZN’s people 24 February 2021 As KwaZulu-Natal (KZN) Premier, SihleZikalala, prepares to present his State of the Province Address (SOPA) on Friday, the Democratic Alliance (DA) expects him to speak to the real needs of our province’s people while also outlining how he and his ANC-led executive plan to deal with the numerous challenges facing our province during the year ahead. There has never been a more desperate time in our province and the Premier must step up to the plate, or fall on his own sword. This is no time to be talking about grand plans or to be hiding behind empty political rhetoric. The DA believes that this year’s SOPA needs to include measurable and viable plans around the following key areas; - Roll-out of the Covid-19 vaccine: The DA expects to hear details on how this will be rolled-out so that it reaches every person, without any delays. This must include information around KZN’s capacity to conduct such a programme - KZN’s unemployment levels. The Premier must tell us what plans are in place to help the millions of unemployed people in our province – a situation which cannot be blamed entirely on the pandemic but which is also due to a provincial economy that has become more sluggish with every year. The DA expects to hear from the Premier when it comes to economic development, with tangible results, rather than just radical rhetoric. - KZN’s Education system. With the drop in the matric pass rate, the DA expects the Premier to present a plan on how KZN will get back on track and deliver a quality education – one where learners leave matric with valuable skills. Critically, we expect him to deal with the fact that Education MEC, KwaziMshengu is currently juggling two critical portfolios at one. This is an untenable situation and the Premier must act decisively, rather than focusing on internal ANC battles, and appoint a capable person to handle Transport and Community Safety and Liaison - KZN’s troubled municipalities. The Premier needs to tell us what is going to be done to address the issue of our province’s numerous failing municipalities as even those under intervention are not showing any real improvement. Residents cannot trust that their municipalities are even vaguely concerned about their needs - Izinduna payments. The Premier needs to tell the people of KZN how the issue of Izinduna back pay will be addressed. At the end of the day there is an outstanding debt which must be paid and the question he must answer is how. The Premier also needs to talk about the recent killings of Izinduna in the province and to commit to investigations in this regard, in line with the DA’s earlier request - Forensic investigations. The Premier needs to give an update on the numerous probes that have been conducted within KZN. This includes details around the number of people arrested or prosecuted as a result of damning forensic investigation reports, particularly when it comes to corruption-related PPE. This happened on his watch and he must tell us what is being done to rid the system of individuals who are no more than criminals and; - Lifestyle and skills audits: The Premier must provide timeframes for lifestyle and skills audits for politicians and senior officials as the scourge of cadre deployment continues to cripple KZN. Every year he talks about this during his SOPA yet nothing ever happens. We want to know why. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_4',113,'0','0']));The DA believes that every possible resource and capability within the provincial government must be dedicated to addressing the key areas outlined above. The Premier will need to show decisive action to achieve much of this. This means making unpopular decisions which show that he is not scared of competing factions within his party, the ANC. The past twelve months have brought untold hardship around the world and here in KZN, people are running out of hope. They have also lost faith in a Premier who seems to protect his cadres - rather than putting their needs first. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_6',114,'0','0']));If the Premier continues to cling to power through the patronage of his ANC cronies, rather than practicing the principles of a capable state, then our province is doomed for failure. Certainly, the DA will not remain silent and will remind voters that they cannot trust a Premier who chooses ANC factionalism over their needs. The DA challenges the Premier to put the people of KZN first by committing to these objectives. If he cannot do this, then he is not fit to run our province and he must go. Issued by Zwakele Mncwango,Leader of the DA in the KZN Legislature, 24 February 2021 eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-4','ezslot_0',115,'0','0']));