South Africa has entered a productive season of writing books. This is a healthy and progressive development as our history must be told, especially the experiences of black people. However, publishers must ensure high professional and ethical standards as well as accuracy in the books they publish. This does not always happen. I write this as a victim of a book entitled: Time is not the Measure by Vusi Mavimbela, a former Director-General in the Presidency who served during 2010-2011, which has been published by Real African Publishers. No effort was made to verify the information published about me in a chapter of the book. The gossip and falsehoods sour what is otherwise an important contribution to the country’s political history. The media accountability system is well-established. The Press Council oversees the Press Code of Ethics and Conduct for South African Print and Online Media. Through the Press Ombudsman, the public has recourse when wronged by print and online media through publishing untruths. I have sought relief from the Ombudsman a number of times and have found the system to work well. The Broadcasting Complaints Commission (BCC) protects members of the public from fabrications and inaccuracies in the electronic media. Through the Press Council and the BCC, errant and unethical broadcasters and publications are forced to take responsibility for fabrications and are made to retract and apologise to those who have been wrongfully accused. The book publishing industry does not have a similar mechanism. I perused the Code of Conduct of the Publishers Association of South Africa. I also enquired from the organisation and they confirmed that they do not have a code similar to that of the media. Their Code is inward looking and relates primarily to disputes within the industry such as unfair competition amongst themselves. It places no obligation on the industry to verify information before publication in order to protect innocent people from having blatant lies published about them. This is a serious gap and injustice give the behaviour of some publishers.eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_0',113,'0','0'])); The accusations published in the Mavimbela book are quite serious and needed to be investigated before publication to ascertain their veracity. For example, the author seems to believe that his communication - phone calls and emails - were intercepted during his tenure as Director-General in the Presidency. To my shock and horror, I discovered in the book a claim that I facilitated the appointment of an unidentified person to a senior position in the National Communication Centre (the NCC), an agency or branch within the State Security Agency which is responsible for managing communication systems. It is claimed by Mavimbela that I “set up the meeting with Zuma where the NCC post was introduced” to this person. The author does not name the person referred to and I remain in the dark about the identity of this candidate that I seemingly recruited. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_3',114,'0','0'])); For the record, I have never spoken to any person who was to be appointed or was later appointed as head of the NCC. I was never asked by President Zuma to arrange such a meeting or “introduction” of any possible candidate for appointment to the NCC or any other SSA entity. The whole matter relating to this person and my involvement in his appointment as related in this book is a blatant lie. The author indicates that he confronted this person on how he was appointed to the NCC post and the person said I had called him to inform of the said pending appointment. Such name-dropping is nothing new and has been a serious malady in government. In 2015 the Presidency had to issue a statement alerting members of the public about con artists who went around claiming that I had sent them to do all manner of things. eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-4','ezslot_5',115,'0','0'])); The head of internal security in the Presidency unmasked one woman who had conned many high profile chief executives and board chairmen of big companies asking for jobs claiming to have been sent by a Lakela Kaunda. She had done well for herself and had scored jobs and promotions over a period of time. Executives were convinced that the person who called to ask for these jobs was Lakela Kaunda. The woman was thankfully arrested and convicted following a successful prosecution after being reported by Transnet for similar fraudulent activities. In another case, the Sunday Times dropped a story where a victim had gone to them believing he had been conned by a Lakela Kaunda. Investigations revealed that the con artist was a receptionist at a school in Pretoria North. Publishers should undertake similar checks and not take things at face value. The fabricated information they have shared with the world effectively accuses me of having abused the office I occupied to get an unqualified person appointed in another state department probably to use the person for nefarious activities! It sounds like a scene from a spy movie and would be entertaining if it did not have serious implications.eval(ez_write_tag([[336,280],'politicsweb_co_za-banner-1','ezslot_4',116,'0','0'])); The book also contains a serious insinuation that I possibly monitored or intercepted the emails of the author during my tenure as Deputy Director-General and head of the private office of President Jacob Zuma and that the communication was being passed on to President Zuma! It is preposterous to believe that I actually had the capacity, interest and energy to intercept anyone’s emails! For what purpose? I read this bit with great shock: “Lakela Kaunda handed a copy of an email to Zuma. It was an email message that I had sent to (Joel) Netshitenzhe. The content of the email was not complimentary to the President”. I have never seen such an email. The author says this revelation was made to him by an official in the Presidency who claims to have seen me handing such an email to President Zuma. There is a lot of other petty gossip that is attributed to staff members. Judging by the contents of the book, they sadly succeeded in causing a lot of paranoia and insecurity. If as a leader you tolerate gossip and smears, mischievous staff will keep you very busy with all sorts of stories to further their own agendas. People talk about leaders including heads of state all the time and it is not always complimentary. President Zuma would never be interested in such gossip and pettiness. I cannot even picture him reading such an email or wanting to hear about it. He had a lot of weighty matters to deal with. I have formally requested the Inspector General of Intelligence to investigate the allegations that I may have intercepted emails and that I interfered with intelligence service appointment processes and caused some unnamed and unqualified official to be appointed as a head of the NCC. A missed recent opportunity is the Presidential Panel headed by former Minister Sydney Mufamadi which investigated alleged wrongdoing within the intelligence services. They could have been asked to probe the allegations contained in this book as well if the intention was to expose and eliminate the abuse of the services. In the working environment, jealousies and insecurities sometimes sadly creep in which give rise to misperceptions and all sorts of accusations and fabrications. These should however never be allowed to besmirch the reputations of ordinary hard working officials. I have worked for close to 30 years and with Mavimbela for probably one year or less - not very closely as the private office reports directly to the political principal in the main, given the nature of the work in political offices. This is one aspect that Mavimbela was most upset about as it comes across strongly in the book. I am proud of the fact that I have conducted myself professionally throughout my working career. I have never engaged in any unprofessional or unethical behaviour. The question remains in my mind: why did the publisher not bother to ask me if the allegations made about me were true or not? What kind of editing takes place in the book publishing industry if all sorts of slander sails through the printing presses? My lawyers wrote to Real African Publishers to inform them of the incorrect information in the book. I have also sent emails emphasising same. They are yet to send a substantive response other than to say they are still trying to find the author! I do not have the money to take the publishers or the author to court. I should not need to have money to protect my integrity and reputation from book publishers. The industry needs to take responsibility and ensure adherence to ethical conduct and truthfulness. Like the media, book publishers should also be subjected to a Code of Conduct which forces them to verify information before publication and which makes provisions for censure should they publish fabrications about people. Lakela Kaunda served as deputy director-general and chief operations officer in the Presidency between 2009 and 2020.