#NotFitToGovern: Premier Makhura’s office failed to implement investigation recommendations 8 February 2021 The Democratic Alliance (DA) in Gauteng is dismayed that the Office of the Premier, David Makhura has failed to implement 86% of the forensic investigation recommendations from the 2019/20 financial year. This was revealed during a presentation to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts (SCOPA) on Friday, 5th February. Included in the presentation was a breakdown of each department’s recommendations that had been implemented, were in progress, or not implemented. The other offending departments include Transport with 54% of their recommendations not implemented, the Department of Health with 34%, and the Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs with 59% unimplemented. 39% of the total forensic investigation recommendations across all provincial departments for the 2019/20 financial year remained unimplemented. These figures are indicative of Premier Makhura’s inability to govern, and lead by true example for other MECs to follow. The worst is that these investigations were made in the financial year before the Covid-19 pandemic and lockdown. Since then, Covid-19 related corruption has exploded in the province, with the Premier’s office now accused of interfering in the appointment of service providers for Personal Protective Equipment. This just simply demonstrates Makhura’s poor track record since the beginning of the term and why he is no longer fit to govern. If the Office of the Premier cannot implement at the very least, the bulk of recommendations from a previous financial year, how can the residents of Gauteng trust him to govern effectively in the current and future years? This is all the more reason for Makhura to go. The stakes are higher than ever before for Gauteng with the Covid-19 pandemic and lockdown. The residents of this province deserve a Premier who is serious about cleaning up government. Issued by Solly Msimanga, Official Leader of the Opposition- Gauteng, 8 February 2021 