COVID figures continue decline all round 9 February 2021 ‘We are cautiously optimistic about the downward trend overall as it’s indicative of continued compliance to health protocols. While this is good news, we want to encourage residents to continue being vigilant and exercising COVID protocols. This will be status quo for a while still as we cannot discount the possibility of a third wave,’ said the City’s Mayoral Committee Member for Community Services and Health, Councillor Zahid Badroodien. Since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic over 170 000 Cape Town residents have been infected with the SARS-CoV-2 virus. ‘Even more tragically, we have lost more than 6 700 of our mothers, fathers, brothers and sisters. To date over 600 City Health staff have been infected, and sadly five have succumbed to the illness.  City Health has been part of the frontline responders to this outbreak – through testing, treating and caring for those affected by COVID-19, while at the same time ensuring that routine health services continue,’ said Councillor Badroodien. At 13h00 on 8 Feb 2021 the total number of active cases in the Metro was 5 257 with considerably lower number of cases recorded daily. However, the second peak came with a tremendous loss for many families. ‘I wish to convey my heartfelt condolences to all who lost loved ones to the virus. We cherish and honour the memory of those who have passed. I wish to thank the residents for their efforts in flattening the curve and stopping the spread of COVID-19, especially in the 2nd wave. Experts predict that we will be faced with a third wave of infections around May or June , which is in the heart of winter in the Western Cape. If the rate of infections , hospital admissions and deaths seen during the second wave is anything to go by, then this is not the time for us to let our guard down and to relax the COVID-19 protocols. We are still facing a pandemic and the same commitment that residents displayed throughout the first and second waves, will be required every day until we get to the end of the pandemic,’ said Councillor Badroodien. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_5',114,'0','0']));The City’s officials will continue to work hard to create awareness in communities on how to stop the spread of COVID-19 . ‘I wish to express my heartfelt gratitude to our frontline workers who continue to serve our communities despite grieving the loss of their loved ones and their own fears and anxiety about the pandemic,’ said Councillor Badroodien. Residents are urged to continue to wash their hands thoroughly and frequently, use a 50% alcohol based hand sanitiser when not close to soap and water, wear a mask correctly when in public and to avoid close contact with other people , as well as crowded and congested spaces. eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-4','ezslot_4',115,'0','0']));Residents who meet the criteria for testing to get tested should they have any symptoms. These are persons older than 45 with COVID-19 symptoms; persons of all ages with comorbidities who have symptoms and healthcare workers. Those with COVID-19 symptoms who experience shortness of breath should go to a hospital immediately. The City is committed to working with the Western Cape Provincial Government in delivering a safe vaccination programme. ‘The first phase of the programme will focus on our healthcare workers. They are not only at the forefront of the pandemic, but have showed continued dedication and commitment to the communities they serve,’ added CouncillorBadroodien. FATALITY MANAGEMENT The number of burials has continued to decrease in the past week with 380 burials, of which 31 were COVID-19 fatalities. Most burials took place at Maitland (112), Klip (57), and Welmoed (57) cemeteries. For the month of January 613 cremations took place, 20% of which were COVID-19 fatalities. Capacity has been temporarily increased allowing for more cremations to be processed daily to meet the high demand. eval(ez_write_tag([[336,280],'politicsweb_co_za-banner-1','ezslot_0',116,'0','0']));Unfortunately, there is a notable decline in weekday burials as people return to preferring Saturday burials over any other weekday, which is putting a strain on operations. ‘I want to encourage the public once again to consider weekday burials to reduce congestion and allow for resources to be distributed more evenly throughout the week,’ said Councillor Badroodien. Not all COVID-19 fatalities occurring in the metropole are buried at City cemeteries or cremated. There are families who prefer to bury their loved ones in private graveyards and there are persons whose remains are transported elsewhere in the country for burial. Issued by Media Office, City of Cape Town, 9 February 2021