MKMVA congratulates advocate Bongani Bongo on the dismissal of his trial for alleged corruption by the Western Cape High Court 27 February 2021 The Umkhonto we Sizwe Military Veterans Association (MKMVA) welcomes the decision of the Judge President of the Western Cape High Court, Mr. Justice John Hlope, to dismiss the corruption case against Advocate Bongani Bongo (MP), and thus to find him not guilty. Comrade Bongo is congratulated with the outcome of the trial, which evidently was never backed up by sufficient evidence. MKMVA notes the verdict in the Conclusion of Judge President Hlope’s 28 page long judgement to the effect, “that there is insufficient evidence upon which a reasonable court” could convict Advocate Bongo, and that the only reason for continuing with the trial was, “the hope that the accused will incriminate himself during the evidence”. Evidently the State had the flimsiest of cases, and was abusing the trial as a ‘fishing expedition’, to try and find the evidence it actually did not have to try and convict Advocate Bongo. The question arises why the State behaved in such a vindictive manner? One is left with the distinct impression that the intention was to find Advocate Bongo guilty by hook-or-by­crook. Evidently there were other motives at play, rather than just the legal prosecutorial process. This is reason for serious concern, because it raises the disconcerting question about whether this is yet another example of deliberate targetting and victimisation motivated by political, rather than legal, objectives. Judge Hlope should be congratulated for the fair and sober manner in which he conducted the trial, and the firmness of his decision that he was not allowing his court to be abused to try and extract incriminating evidence during cross examination of the accused which the NPA, and witnesses that they lined up, failed to present at the outset of the trial. His judgement is an island of sanity and fairness in an increasing sea of judicial capture. Suffice to say that this not guilty verdict conclusively proves that the constitutional maxim that every citizen must be deemed innocent until found guilty by a properly constituted court of law, should always be respected. It is demonstrably clear that it would have been grossly unfair for comrade Bongo to have been forced to step aside from his positions as ANC NEC member, and Member of Parliament, on the basis of mere allegations that have now been proved to be baseless. His political career could have been destroyed for no valid reason. There were many, motivated by vindictiveness and political factionalism, who have already rushed to find Advocate Bongo ‘guilty’ in the kangaroo courts of the ‘manufactured outrage’ of their orchastrated propaganda campaigns. All of those who made themselves guilty of such unbecoming conduct owe Advocate Bongo an unconditional apology. Now that the unfair clouds of allegations and suspicion that had been hovering over comrade Bongo’s head, have been removed, MKMVA wishes him well in his continuing service to the ANC and to the people of our country. Advocate Bongo is a highly skilled well trained laywer and freedom fighter who have much to offer in the struggle for the full liberation of black (especially African) South Africans. Rather than being hemmed in, and obstacles placed in their ways, young committed comrades like him should be given the opportunity to fulfil their potential in the service of our people. MKMVA sincerely hopes that he will now be given the opportunity to do exactly that. Issued by Carl Niehaus, National Spokesperson, MKMVA, 27 February 2021