EFF statement on re-employment sexual predator Motsamai Molefe as an acting principle 11 February 2021 The EFF condemns the Department of Education in Gauteng for the re-employment of a sexual predator masquerading as a teacher, MrMotsamai Molefe. In 2014, MrMotsamai Molefe was found guilty on seven charges relating to sexual assault by the Department of Education in Gauteng. At the time of these findings, Molefe was the Principal of Phahama High School in Mohlakeng, after being found guilty, the Department terminated his contract of employment from the school. To our dismay, the very same sexual predator continues to masquerade as a teacher and has been appointed as the Acting Principal of John Martin Catholic School in Kagiso. This monster's re-employment is a clear indication that even after being found guilty of sexual assault and having his employment terminated, he continued teaching. This predator found guilty of committing acts of sexual assault on his students at that time, violating learners' rights, should be treated as the predator he has proven himself to be. He preyed on young female learners who went to school to get educated not to be sexually assaulted. The Department continues to prove that the ANC-led government has, and continues to fail dismally in dealing with perpetrators of Gender-Based Violence. Therefore, we call on the Department of Education in Gauteng to submit the report detailing the hearing's outcomes to the South African Council for Educators (SACE), a professional council responsible for the teaching profession. The SAGE must, in return, institute a process to de-register this teacher in terms of the SACE Act 31 of 2000. MrMotsamai Molefe has shown that he is extremely dangerous around a girl child, he has violated the rights of the learners as entrenched in the South African Schools Act. He must not be permitted to continue roaming freely, whilst denying children the right to education and the right to the protection of their physical integrity. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_3',114,'0','0']));Furthermore, we call on John Martin Catholic School to immediately terminate the contract of employment of this serial predator and perpetrator of violence against children. And we call on the South African Police Services (SAPS) to launch a full investigation into the matter and hold Mr Molefe accountable for all these atrocious acts. We cannot continue to harbour such perpetrators of Gender Based Violence in our society and in the presence of school children, in particular the girl child. Issued by Vuyani Pambo, National Spokesperson, EFF, 11 February 2021