EFF statement on former president Jacob Zuma’s decision to not cooperate with the ZondoCommission 1 February 2021 The EFF notes the statement by former President Jacob Zuma in relation to the Commission on State Capture. We strongly believe that the decision of Mr. Jacob Zuma to defy the Constitutional Court and laws that govern society is misguided. We call on Mr. Zuma and his legal counsel to reconsider the ill-advised decision to defy particularly the Constitutional Court, because such will leave an unsustainable precedent and might lead to instability. Mr. Jacob Zuma must respond to the many allegations of corruption and wrongdoing levelled against Our call to Mr. Jacob Zuma to abide by the law also considers that the activities, direction and approach of the Commission of Inquiry into State capture have been less than satisfactory. The Zondo Commission seems to be a factional instrument to fight for the protection of the Pravin Gordhan and Ramaphosa, protecting a Cabal whose main interest and purpose into safeguard the white capitalist establishment. It is undisputable that additional to Guptas Criminal syndicate capture of certain key functions of government, the South African State and its entire economy continue to be firmly captured by the white minority capitalist establishment which owns more than 80% of the land and control more than 00% of the economy including banks, medical aid schemes, state owned companies, insurance companies, retail chain stores and government. The white capitalist establishment capture of the State happens in collaboration with the Ramaphosa political faction whose power was bought through capitalist money. The Zondo Commission seems to avoid the fact that billions of Rands used to buy Ramaphosa's presidency amount to deepest form of State capture and control. When former ESKOM CEO Brian Molefe was exposing the massive correct network around ESKOM's coal supplies and the role of Mr. Cyril Ramaphosa, Judge Zondo claimed Corona exposure and disrupted the undisputable and hard-core evidence against Ramaphosa. We therefore call for the Zondo Commission of Inquiry to exercise justice in a manner that will bring confidence to the people of South Africa, that justice is being sought not factional agendas. Thus far, the Zondo Commission has veered into factional battles aimed at protecting the Pravin Gordhan led Cabal which fully controls Cyril Ramaphosa on behalf of the white capitalist establishment. In the immediate, the Zondo Commission must proceed with and complete the submissions by former ESKOM CEO Brian Molefe and thereafter call Ramaphosa to come and account about his relationship with ESKOM Coal suppliers. The Zondo Commission must give attention to all sides of those alleging impropriety in the State Security Agency (SSA) and in pursuit of truth must declassify the information that will bring about the much-needed information on State capture and control. In the immediate, the Zondo Commission should hasten the process of revealing the names of Judges and Journalists who were or, are in the payroll of SSA so that they are promptly ejected from media and Courts. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_3',114,'0','0']));In this context, no one in South Africa including a former or sitting President should defy the rulings of the Constitutional Court because South Africa is under the Rule of Law. One of the important features of South Africa's Constitutional democracy is the Rule of Law and all of us must abide by the Rule of Law and Constitution. We reiterate our call to former President Jacob Zuma and his Legal Counsel to reconsider the outright defiance of the Constitutional Court because there will always be recourse if the Zondo Commission's biasness continues Issued by Vuyani Parnbo, National Spokesperson, EFF, 2 February 2021