EFF statement on SA government’s failure to pay student fees abroad  9 February 2021eval(ez_write_tag([[250,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_0',112,'0','0'])); The EFF notes with dismay the reports that South African students in Portugal face financial exclusion and eviction as a result of the government's failure to pay for their academic and residence fees. In a time of human tragedy as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, Cyril Ramaphosa's government has exhibited further recklessness and contempt for education, by subjecting vulnerable students abroad to uncertainty, humiliation and fundamentally undermining their right to education. eval(ez_write_tag([[468,60],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_4',113,'0','0']));It is important to note that this is not the first time South African students abroad have been subjected to financial uncertainty and left helpless in other countries as a result of this government's complete disregard for education. The lives of those who have gone to further their studies and represent this country in academic institutions across the world have been put in jeopardy in numerous instances, with students identifying failure by national and provincial education departments to pay their fees and provide urgent aid in Russia, China and the United Kingdom to name but a few occasions. In some instances, we have witnessed society having to mobilize money to send aid to students who have either been stranded during the COVID-19 pandemic, or have ran out of basic necessities, due to being abandoned by their government. In all instances, Blade Nzimande has been the Minister of Higher Education, Science and Technology, and has exhibited incompetence and inability to prioritize student interests locally and abroad. Nzimande continues to fail on all metrics that are required to ensure education remains a pivotal tool for the developmental interests of society, and his tenure has been characterized by the exclusion of students and the destruction of their faith in education. priority and Nzimande must stop being complacent in the jeopardizing of the lives of vulnerable students. Further to that, we will request a comprehensive database of all South African students who are studying abroad and are dependent on funding from any arm of South African government. eval(ez_write_tag([[468,60],'politicsweb_co_za-box-4','ezslot_1',115,'0','0']));There must be a comprehensive breakdown of the status of their funding and how much money has been allocated to ensure they never find themselves at the mercy of foreign governments abroad. We will be monitoring the situation closely and reach out to these students to ensure their safety and security in a time where they are helpless. We encourage the Portuguese government to practice humanity during this difficult time, and will reach out to Portugal's Embassy to appeal to their conscious to desist from victimizing people who have gone to their country to promote and further international solidarity in the quest for education. Issued by Vuyani Pambo, National Spokesperson, EFF, 9 February 2021