Jessie Duarte penned an article which was published in the Daily Maverick on 9 February 2021 entitled, “Testimony at Zondo Commission is an onslaught against the people”. This article has attracted many opinions. Before getting into why Jessie’s tirade must be challenged, let us examine who the “people” is against whom there is a purported onslaught. It would be useful to educate ourselves on the following facts before anyone soul can speak on behalf of the “people”; In 2019 the South African population stood at 58.78 million The registered voting population stood at 26.7million in 2019 The number of citizens who voted in the 2019 general election amounted to 17.4million eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_6',113,'0','0']));The ANC managed to garner about 10million votes (57.7% which is down from 69.6% obtained in the 2004 elections) From these factual statistics, Jessie Duarte can surely not proclaim to speak on behalf of all South Africans nor can she claim to be representing the views of the working class and the poorest of the poor who has suffered from the stealing and looting on the watch of the ANC government. With all the factions prevailing in the African National Congress and its Alliance partners, the ANC DSG makes a fundamental mistake to dare offer a legitimate claim against the Zondo Commission. Why the Zondo Commission has much work to do There can be no doubt that corruption is a worldwide phenomenon. Corruption in South Africa is not new since this evil thrived under the Apartheid regime. The public appeal and interest in the work of the Zondo Commission stems from the exhaustion South Africans have with how the African National Congress as a party and as government of the day allowed corruption, fraud and thievery to steam ahead unabated with very little consequences. eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-4','ezslot_5',115,'0','0']));The post 1994 government has had corruption scandals around every corner with leading lights of the ANC always at the centre of the sleaze. We all remember the arms deal scandal, the 2010 world cup scandal, the travel agent/Members of parliament scandal, just to mention a few. What Zondo reveals, in no uncertain terms, is that it is not the poor who are stealing or who are beneficiaries of the thievery. It is people that earn a decent income from parliament, cabinet, the presidency, provincial government, municipalities, state owned enterprises and officials who are supposed public servants that are stealing much needed resources from the mouths of the poor. No-doubt private sector corruption cannot be ignored because in class terms capitalism inherently breeds and reproduces corruption. Who can forget the bread pricing collusion? Who can forget the massive influence of the Gupta family over state entities and resources? At some point there were allegations that the ANC DSG, her son and her husband were beneficiaries of the Gupta largesse or is it back handed benevolence? How our safety and security came to be auctioned off The world of spying and intelligence gathering/dissemination have historically been a murky world around the world. Prior to the adoption of the South African Constitution by the Constituent Assembly, the Reconstruction and Development Plan (RDP) had this to say about role of our security services; 5.6 SECURITY FORCESeval(ez_write_tag([[336,280],'politicsweb_co_za-banner-1','ezslot_3',116,'0','0'])); 5.6.1 The defence force, the police and intelligence services must be firmly under civilian control, in the first place through the relevant civilian ministry answerable to parliament. These security forces must uphold the democratic constitution, they must be non-partisan, and they must be bound by clear codes of conduct. 5.6.2 The size, character and doctrines of the new defence force must be appropriate to a country engaged in a major programme of socio-economic reconstruction and development. The rights of soldiers must be clearly defined and protected. 5.6.3 The police service must be transformed, with special attention to representivity, and gender and human rights sensitivity. National standards and training must be combined with community-based structures to ensure answerability to the communities served. What the Zondo Enquiry revealed, when it heard the testimonies of Mr. Sidney Mafumadi and the SSA’s Acting Director General Mr. Japtha, was that the habit and the practice of stealing was endemic even within the ambit of those who must ensure the safety and security of South Africans. Different factions in the ANC came to be beneficiaries of the loot. What has been suspected amongst some of us was the disturbing news that a Judge and journalists benefited in monetary terms from slush funds in the national intelligence agency. What then is the nub of the criticism against Jesse Duarte’s unwelcomed intervention? All South Africans heard Mr. Zuma loudly and clearly when he established the Commission to investigate corruption. Mr. Zuma made an appeal to all South Africans to cooperate with the Zondo Commission. Besides going against his own advice, the ANC DSG appears to be saying that the ANC and its leaders/members must not be subjected to the kind of scrutiny that we see at the Zondo Commission. We have yet to hear what Mr. Ramaphosa would say to the Zondo Commission but what is already abundantly clear is that ANC factions are speaking through different sides of the mouth and in the process revealing the deep seated factional politics that lives inside the African National Congress. Duarte’s article makes reference to visits to the Gupta compound in apologetic terms. Therein lies her “now hidden, now open” disclosure of her sloping towards the Saxonworld shebeen. The lecture about organisational form and decision making, she endeavours, is a downright joke because those structures entrusted with the execution of the highest decision making structure in the ANC (the National Conference) cannot even agree on what was resolved with respect to the stepping aside of individuals who might be fingered in alleged wrongdoing or corruption. There is a serious need to look at South Africa’s constituent representative system. It requires a national discussion and perhaps the dusting off of the Van Zyl Slabbert Report. What however cannot be tolerated is the hiding behind caucus positions to conceal and mask wrong doing by public representatives. Jesse Duarte’s idea “that our people, despite the ramblings of the few who testified at the commission, continue to put their hopes and trust in the ANC” is so misplaced that one wonders in which South Africa she lives. The electoral decline of the ANC has been ongoing since 1999. Unemployment, Inequality, Poverty and Corruption has been on the rise since NP and ANC rule. There is no onslaught against the people Ms. Jesse Duarte concludes her article that there is “an onslaught against the people”. What we can declare without equivocation is that the stealing from the people is the actual onslaught. I am certain that in this democratic engagement one has to express the wisdom and ethos of Voltaire who says; “I might disagree with your opinion, but I am willing to give my life for your right to express it.” All we ask Ms. Duarte is that you show respect for the South African Constitution and that you shed your factionalism and your defence for the indefensible. Karl Cloete writes in his personal capacity. He is the former Numsa Deputy General Secretary