AstraZeneca setback disappointing; highlights need for agile and comprehensive vaccination plan 8 February 2021 Note to Editors: Please find the attached soundbite by Siviwe Gwarube MP.eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_0',112,'0','0'])); The announcement made by Health Minister, Dr Zweli Mkhize and his team last night that the efficacy of the Oxford AstraZeneca vaccine, due for rollout this month, has dropped to 22% against the 501.V2 variant is deeply disappointing. South Africa has been waiting eagerly for the rollout of an effective vaccine for our healthcare and frontline workers. The news that the rollout will be halted due to the reduced efficacy in our domestic circumstances hamstrings this effort and means that we may find ourselves in the throes of another 3rd wave of the Covid-19 pandemic. We understand that this is a highly volatile and forever changing scientific environment. The emerging of a new variant further complicates the response by the South African government and means that we ought to be agile and thorough in our approach and strategy. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_2',113,'0','0']));That is why it is inexcusable that we negotiated- at a higher price- the procurement of the Oxford AstraZeneca vaccine from the Serum Indian Institute without due diligence and factoring in the expiry date of the vaccines. The reality is that while the clinical studies of the efficacy against the new variant are new, we should have taken into account the possibility of the changing efficacy or delays in rollout strategy and ensured that we were prepared for that – at least ensured that we wouldn’t be chasing an expiry date deadline. The admission by the Department of Health that this expiry date was only discovered upon the arrival of the stock is deeply problematic. We note that the initial clinical findings show that the Johnson and Johnson vaccine has a 57% efficacy rate against the 501.V2 variant and thus could be an the option that South Africa opts for. We also note that Dr Mkhize committed that the Pfizer vaccine will also be brought on board as soon as possible. Now is the time to act speedily and thoroughly. We must ensure that various vaccines which have a high efficacy rate against the 501.V2 variant go through the necessary approvals by our regulatory body, the South African Health Products Regulatory Authority (SAHPRA); eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_4',114,'0','0']));We need to urgently ascertain the efficacy of the Oxford AstraZeneca vaccine already here against preventing severe illness, hospitalisation and death so that a different strategy can be employed without wasting the vaccines in South Africa already; We need to ensure that various clinical trials in the South African environment are conducted on various vaccines while we wait for the development of vaccines that will immunise against further mutations of the virus. We need to diversify the acquisition fishing net to ensure that we are testing various vaccines against the new variant and not rely only on a specific vaccine at any given time. eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-4','ezslot_3',115,'0','0']));There are no easy answers to this crisis. That is why we have long held that government must have a codified plan for the acquisition, costing and rollout of the vaccine process. While factors change daily, a plan available for scrutiny will allow for questions to be asked and recommendations to be made in order for us to get an effective vaccine to our frontline workers and the most vulnerable citizens urgently. We stand ready to support government with concrete, credible and implementable recommendations during this crisis. This is because an effective vaccine is the only way that we can regain some kind of normality in South Africa and save lives and livelihoods. Issued by SiviweGwarube,DA Shadow Minister of Health, 8 February 2021