The word liberal has become stigmatised in South Africa. One dare not own up to being one today. I think there are several key reasons. It is associated with the hypocrisy of liberal whites during apartheid. Liberal is confused with neoliberalism of the post-1994 dispensation. Liberal is also ignorantly muddled up with libertarianism, regarded as a central tenant of the official opposition, and the liberals in the DA are seen as the faction most opposed to race-based policies such as BBBEE. So a combination of philosophical ignorance and recoiling in horror from those who profess to be liberals has done us in. So let me define what I mean by being a liberal, for it seems the term is no longer widely understood in the way that I, at least, understand it. If you believe in the autonomy and dignity of the individual and that human rights arise from this and are paramount; if you believe that all of us should be treated as equals, regardless of the colour of our skin, our gender, our status or culture, and that everyone should be shown respect even if you strongly disagree with them; if you believe we should strive to create a society with the conditions that allow everyone to be free, to choose their destiny, love whomever they want, and find fulfilment for themselves; and if you hold that a constitutional democracy is the least worst form of government to achieve this, then you are a liberal in my book. I hold all these liberal values as easily defensible; violations of them as abhorrent. Supreme among liberal values is the belief in the ineluctable value of transparency of truth, even when the truth defies what one would have preferred. This is not a value held in any regard by totalitarian states, whether they be fascist, communist or theocratic. And it is the belief in truth, and that it be made public, that is convulsing 'liberal democracies' around the world, as those who seek to honour this public good are shouted down by politicians blatantly deceiving them. The problem is that the Age of Enlightenment and its humanist project was sullied by the hypocrisy of liberals supporting racial hierarchies, colonialism, slavery and apartheid. There is nothing liberal about racism or slavery. There was nothing liberal about gunship diplomacy or the way Britain and Europe for centuries deliberately set about destroying the two biggest economies the world had ever seen – China and India. But that is not an argument to abandon the Enlightenment. Rather we should acknowledge the indebtedness and extraordinary contribution that Africans have made to the Enlightenment project, enriching and deepening it by pointing out its manifest contradictions in practice, its incompatibility with slavery and colonialism, and demanding that Europe reform itself in line with its own values. In fact, teaching and civilising Europeans to be consistent with their own professed values fell to Africans and Caribbeans (although Western hypocrisy remains alive and well to this day). And Africans have continued to build humanism and advance the Rights of Man, with for example in South Africa the introduction of such things as socio-economic rights into its Constitution. The Constitution was animated by righteous indignation at the totalitarian apartheid past. ‘Never, never and never again shall it be that this beautiful land will again experience the oppression of one by another,’ said Mandela. We would never again permit the government to legally kill or silence its citizens or hide the truth. Our Constitution would enshrine the first-generation rights of the Enlightenment thinkers: life, dignity, equality, privacy, and the fundamental freedoms associated with democracy: freedom of expression, association, assembly, opinion, belief and religion, and movement. The indebtedness to the Enlightenment is expressly stated on the website of the Constitutional Court of South Africa. First, second and third generation rights  envisage a social democratic state as the vehicle to realise what are essentially liberal values for everyone in our society.eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-4','ezslot_2',115,'0','0'])); I see no reason to accept that neoliberal or libertarian brands of capitalism are the inevitable outcome of liberal values or that liberal values can only be grounded in these two economic ideologies. Neoliberalism arguably distorts and contradicts social values held by classic liberals, such as Smith and Locke. Disturbing to me also is that many now oppose the ‘rainbow’ vision – of a non-racial, united South Africa. Government keeps inventing legislation and political parties keep espousing views which directly clash with our rights as enshrined in the Constitution. We have to hold the course and resist the populist, nationalist, illiberal backlash that has followed the subsequent decline of the economy that threatened to set us on the fast-track to ruin, even before Covid-19 escaped into our world. At times, it seems as if our political leaders – specifically the EFF and the Zuma faction in the ANC – are about to scuttle the entire project. On the other hand, the grassroots battles that cross my desk daily as a news editor – battles by impoverished communities for housing, water and land, the fight to advance workers’ rights, the struggle for various social justice causes, the hundreds of protests for socioeconomic rights, the occupy movements and Extinction Rebellion – I do not see as contradicting my liberal values. Their methods might, but not their causes. South Africa is not alone in facing a backlash of populism expressing itself in various formations in what were once the leading anti-Fascist democracies of the world. Afrophobic and anti-immigrant views; facile proclamations that democracy is a failure; blaming all one’s economic woes on certain racially defined groups – these are all sentiments gaining traction in South Africa too. Many hanker for a strong leader to sort it all out, even if they use undemocratic, unconstitutional means: Malema, Zille, Zuma or Ramaphosa, take your pick, so long as they are our leader doing the things we want. I have not heard a good argument justifying trampling on the fundamental democratic rights of any person in order to achieve the socioeconomic rights envisioned by our Constitution. The concept of collateral damage and necessary evil – the ‘need’ to breach people’s human rights – is usually a lame excuse to create unjust laws and policies demanded by a powerful elite or the gullibility of the masses or both. To be a liberal, as I understand, is the best bulwark against these national socialist and autocratic trends. Brent Meersman’s latest book, Rattling The Cage: Reflections on Democratic South Africa, is a wide-ranging set of essays covering the economic, political and social transition of the country since 1994, and addressing such varied issues as free speech, immigration, police brutality, crime, protest action, Fees Must Fall, state capture and climate change. Published by Picador PanMacmillan.