SACP Free State denounces lies peddled at court appearance in Bloemfontein and reaffirms its support to Law Enforcement Agencies, calls for speedier processing of the case 19 February 2021 eval(ez_write_tag([[336,280],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_0',112,'0','0']));The South African Communist Party (SACP) in Free State Province categorically denounces the lies peddled by Andile Lungisa that the SACP attended the court appearance in support of those accused of fraud, corruption and money laundering. Mr Lungisa, in an act of desperation, thanked the SACP for attending the court appearance while addressing a crowd that gathered in Bloemfontein. The SACP rejects his insinuation and distances itself from those who attended the court appearance in support of the accused and in clear defiance of Covid-19 regulations. The SACP in Free State reiterates its unequivocal support to law enforcement agencies and the advances they are making in our province in pursuing corruption cases. We urge them to pursue all instances of corruption without fear, favour or prejudice. Corruption enriches individuals and dents efforts by the democratic government to roll out desperately needed development and services to communities. It is for this reason that the SACP in Free State has consistently campaigned against corruption and also welcomed the arrests in connection with the R225 million Free State Provincial asbestos audit tender. It is strange that Mr Lungisa suggests otherwise in terms of our support, when community members remain vulnerable to asbestos exposure, despite millions of Rands squandered. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_1',113,'0','0']));The SACP welcomes the court progress today in setting August 2021 as the pre-trial date for the case and hopes there will be no further postponements. Whilst the SACP hoped for an earlier date, we nonetheless welcome the settlement reached. The SACP reiterates that this process must be pursued speedily and at the end, where prosecution is successful, we call for severe sentences accompanied by asset forfeiture against those who benefitted unduly from public resources. Issued by Phillip Kganyago, SACP Free State Provincial Spokesperson, 19 February 2021