ANC unlawfully refuses to schedule DA motion of no confidence in Premier Makhura, indicates split ANC caucus 19 February 2021 eval(ez_write_tag([[336,280],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_0',112,'0','0']));The Democratic Alliance (DA) in Gauteng is apalled that the ANC in the Gauteng Provincial Legislature (GPL) have unlawfully refused to schedule the DA’s motion of no confidence (MONC) in Premier David Makhura, to a debate and subsequent vote. Late last month, the DA tabled a MONC in Premier Makhura after it was revealed that his office had directly influenced the appointment of service providers for Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) last year. Further to this, Premier Makhura and his government have affected governance failure after failure since the start of their term in May 2019, and blatantly demonstrated a lack of political will to root out corruption and build a capable provincial government. The obstruction by the ANC of a constitutionally-recognised mechanism is an insult to the system of participatory democracy that the voters elected us to uphold in 2019. Further to this, refusing to schedule the DA motion, citing that the motion must first be deliberated by the Whippery of the Legislature, undermines the Rules of the GPL by hampering a Member to participate in the business of the Legislature that is consistent with democracy. Such legal opinions on the matter that support our view have already been furnished to the Speaker of the Legislature, Ntombi Lentheng Mekgwe. The decision on the DA’s motion very clearly indicates a split ANC caucus. If the ANC was certain they held the majority of votes to defeat the motion, they would respect democracy and allow the debate and vote to go ahead. One only needs to remember the explosion of PPE and Covid-19 related corruption in the province last year, the failure of the Premier’s office to implement 86% of forensic investigation recommendations from the previous financial year, and the inability of Makhura to release the Bank of Lisbon fire criminal investigation report, to recognise that Makhura is indeed no longer fit to govern. Just like the illegal and politically-driven Tshwane Municipality Council dissolution of last year, the DA remains on the right side of the law and will continue to fight for a MONC debate and vote in the GPL. Mahkura must, and will, be held accountable. Issued by Solly Msimanga, Leader of the Opposition in Gauteng, 19 February 2021eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-4','ezslot_2',115,'0','0']));