Public Protector’s findings against Western Cape MEC Anton Bredell: Premier’s reprimand and response disgraceful 2 February 2021 The Public Protector recently found that Western Cape MEC Anton Bredell breached the Executive Ethics Code when he unlawfully interfered in the appointment of a senior manager in the George Municipality. The Public Protector found Bredell’s actions amounted to a conflict of interest as he attempted to ensure that the DA’s preferred candidate was appointed instead of the candidate selected through the municipality selection process. In a lengthy letter tabled with the Western Cape Provincial Parliament the Premier justifies MEC Bredell's  unlawful interference in the administration of the George Municipality on the basis that it is the same as the ANC's cadre deployment policy. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_5',113,'0','0']));The DA has been caught out implementing its own version of cadre deployment and the Premier is basically saying it’s okay for DA leaders to dictate who should be appointed to positions in councils because the ANC also does it. The Premier is also unable to understand the concept of a conflict of interests.  He suggests that the conduct is not subject to the Public Protector's oversight because Bredell was acting in his capacity as a DA leader.  This is the very essence of a conflict of interests. Finally the Premier's so called "reprimand" is nothing more than a begrudging act of compliance exposing a disgraceful disdain for the Constitution and the office of the Public Protector. eval(ez_write_tag([[336,280],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_1',114,'0','0']));If the Premier, the MEC or the DA and its leaders do not agree that the report is lawful and binding on them then they should review it.  It’s is wrong to undermine the office of a chapter 9 institution in the manner in which the Premier has responded.. The Premier's conduct is disgraceful.  He has responded as a constitutional delinquent. Issued by Brett Herron, Secretary-General, GOOD, 2 February 2021