DA calls for the establishment of a National Register for Sex Offenders for teachers 12 February 2021 The Democratic Alliance (DA) in Gauteng is calling for the establishment of a National Register for Sex Offenders for teachers in order to protect learners against ‘sex pests’. It has now become a norm, particularly for teachers who have been dismissed from public schools for either sexual assault, sexual harassment, or rape, to go and seek employment from private schools. In most cases, some private schools do not have any mechanisms in place to check the employment history of their candidates, resulting in the lives of learners being put at risk. In a recent incident, the private John Martin Catholic School in Kagiso appointed an acting principal who was dismissed by the Gauteng Department of Education in 2014 for sexually assaulting and harassing learners at another school. The appointment of the acting principal has caused outrage amongst the parents who are concerned about their children’s safety. The existing National Register for Sex Offenders (NRSO) was established by an Act of Parliament in 2007 but is kept confidential. In addition, the NRSO only record the names of those found guilty of sexual offences against children and mentally disabled people. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_4',114,'0','0']));The National Register for Sex Offenders for teachers should be made public for both public and private schools to have access, including the parents, in order to protect their children against sex predators. This register will ensure that those teachers who have been dismissed for sexually-related cases are blacklisted. The safety of learners should be a priority in order to build a better future and country for all. The DA will continue to put pressure on the ANC-led government to consider establishing a National Register for Sex Offenders for teachers to ensure the safety of learners at schools. Issued by Khume Ramulifho, DA Gauteng Shadow MEC for Education, 12 February 2021