EFF statement on ENCA racial profiling of instruction of wearing mask 25 February 2021 The EFF notes with disgust, the racist news agency Enca's racial profiling of members of Parliament, which resulted in rude and racially motivated instructions of who must wear a mask when addressing on their media platform. In a blatant display of utter fear of white Members of Parliament and disdain showed towards black members of Parliament, the racist Lindsay Dentlinger loudly instructed certain members of Parliament to wear masks, while allowing white politicians to address them without a mask. In an inexplicable series of interviews, she took interviews with the FF+ leader Peter Groenewald and DA leader John Steenhuisen without them wearing masks, yet rudely and constantly instructed black party leaders such as the UDM's Nqabayomzi Kwankwa to wear a mask. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_3',113,'0','0']));These actions are known as racist micro-aggressions, and reveal a deep-seated disrespect of black people by a news agency that the EFF has long identified as a propaganda arm of white monopoly capital. The actions of the journalist of Enca vindicate the EFF's position that there is a culture of racism and factionalism at the Enca, where the disrespect of black people thrives. The rot at Enca is so deep, that white individuals perpetuate a culture of hate and discrimination against black people boldly in the public domain. WE reiterate our position that we have permanently disengaged with Enca, who pulled out of the EFF's Second National People's Assembly on the instruction of their handler Johann Rupert, because the Political Report of the Commander In Chief Julius Malema implicated those who bankroll their bought media platform. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_9',114,'0','0']));We call on parliament to take action against practice of racism in the precinct by eNCA. Parliament has a duty, in line with the Powers, Privileges and Immunities Act, to protect MPs against any form of abuse and harassment in the precinct. We reiterate our call for the boycotting of this racist news platform. All self-respecting organizations, who claim to exist to better the conditions of the majority of our people should follow suit, and never allow themselves to be disrespected by a fake news agency whose agenda is to undermine black people in the interests of white power. It is NOT unconscious bias! it’s RACISM! This is RACISM. When you say “unconscious” it’s like you are racism she doesn’t intend it, it slips out! But it is conscious, deliberate, decided upon & a normal way white people treat and relate to blacks people! pic.twitter.com/X6eopNK0DS Issued by Vuyani Pambo, National Spokesperson, EFF, 25 February 2021