EFF statement on Eskom’s racist marginalization of black executives and companies 27 February 2021 The EFF notes the suspension of the Eskom Chief Procurement Officer, Sully Tshitangano, by the CEO Andre de Ruyter. This comes after Sully Tshitangano took issue with the solidification of racists tendencies by De Ruyter at Eskom, which included favouring white companies over black companies, and the continuing removal of all voices of black managers who do not toe De Ruyter's destructive line at Eskom. As chief Procurement Officer, Tshitangano had the management responsibility for all procurement related issues at Eskom, but had his power taken away by De Ruyter and a group of white men he has surrounded himself with at Eskom. In a letter that Tshitangano had written to the Minister of Public Enterprises, Pravin Gordhan, he outlined just how destructive and racist De Ruyter has been at Eskom. In his letter, Tshitangano makes examples of how De Ruyter was only too eager to suspend the contract Eskom had with Econ Oil, a black owned supplier, without any thorough investigation first. We now know that an independent adjudicator ruled last December that the tender Eskom had awarded to Econ Oil was regular and enforceable. De Ruyter, together with his white enforcers, were irritated with having a black owned company contracted to Eskom for such a lot of money, an abomination in their racist culture and thought. De Ruyter must explain himself on what motivated his decision to suspend the Econ Oil contract, he must make public the investigation reports he relied on. Further, he must explain the role of Ben Theron and Werner Moulton at Eskom, and the legal instruments from which they derive their authority at Eskom. He must further explain why did these two white men undermine the authority of the chief Procurement Officer at Eskom. It is saddening, although not surprising, that Tshitangano wrote to Gordhan twice, to alert him to the racist wave sweeping at Eskom ever since De Ruyter took over, and twice, Gordhan ignored him. We have long maintained that Gordhan is the chief architect of the destruction of Eskom, and that he has a very disdainful view of black people, particularly African people. It is for this reason that he ignored Tshitangano, because in his racist mind, white is always right. We are pleased that Solly Tshitangano is scheduled to appear before the Standing Committee on Public Accounts in parliament in the coming week. We will use this opportunity to ask him to lay bare the abuse of procurement processes at Eskom to exclude black companies, and benefit white companies. Pravin Gordhan and Andre De Ruyter's reign of terror at Eskom needs to be brought to an abrupt end, and we shall ensure that this happens fast. Issued by Vuyani Pambo, National Spokesperson, EFF, 27 February 2021